How do you help people roleplay in your MUD in a way that makes it open enough 
for players to truly be the character they want to be, yet still keeps things 
predictable enough for creators.  I spent some time this week interviewing a 
few of my favorite MUDders, trying to get a feel for what exactly they seem 
to expect out of their MUD, to help them get by.


CULTURE
Culture is a big thing.  If there is no compelling reason for the player to 
roleplay in YOUR universe, they'll go someplace that is more appealing.  
This doesn't necessarily mean that if a player is into science fiction and 
you're writing a fantasy MUD you lose them as a player.  People seemed to 
care much more about depth than content.  A few things MUDding roleplayers 
seemed care a lot about is making their character fit in the MUD world as a 
whole.  Often players are anomalously super-powered compared to the NPCs in 
the world, and appear on the face of the planet with no back story, no 
family, friends, residence, history, or any of that.  Write your world so 
that players can fill niches in the environment.


SOULS
Souls are an old term from LPC MUDs, and basically refer to the action commands 
a player might use to represent their physical precense in the MUD.  Smile, 
nod, frown, clap, and grimace are all examples of what souls might be.  
They're intended to help players interact with each other more naturally, by 
providing a relatively standard syntax and output
    nod jim
    You nod at Salty Jim.
    [Salty Jim sees: emsenn nods at you.]
However, in asking around, I was relatively stunned to see that a large number 
of roleplayers don't use souls at *all*.  Rather than use the action commands 
provided to them through the game, they prefer to emote things in a more literal 
method, with the emote command.
    emote nods at Jim.
    emsenn nods at Jim.
    [Salty Jim sees: emsenn nods at Jim.]
Obviously this method is less than ideal, so should emphasize the importance of 
writing consistent, simple, and logical souls.


ENVIRONMENT
If you want to encourage people to hang out, provide fun places to do so!  A 
pleasant bar, a theater where players can go on stage and perform, a nice place 
to grab a bite to eat, whatever fits your game world.  Provide a hub of where 
social activity gets started, and you will greatly help expand the ability for 
roleplayers to dive into the crowd and start playing their role.
